docs: first draft multi-sync-sources ADR (#1636)
open-feature/flagd: docs/architecture-decisions/multiple-sync-sources.md

---
# Valid statuses: draft | proposed | rejected | accepted | superseded
status: draft
author: Dave Josephsen
created: 2025-05-21
updated: 2025-05-21
---

> # ADR: Multiple Sync Sources

Reviewer: Sorry, I still don't get the high-level idea after reading the ADR - are we trying to change something for config syncing or flag (and other data) storage of flagd?

> It is the Intent of this document to articulate our rationale for supporting multiple flag synchronization sources (grpc, http, blob, local file, etc..) as a core design property of Flagd. Because "future proofing" the runtime against sources that don't yet exist, or those we may have omitted is a requisite byproduct of this architectural decision, this document also includes a short discussion of how flagd is engineered to enable the community to extend it to support new sources in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is the Intent of this document to articulate our rationale for supporting multiple flag synchronization sources (grpc, http, blob, local file, etc..) as a core design property of flagd. This document also includes a short discussion of how flagd is engineered to enable the community to extend it to support new sources in the future, to "future proof" the runtime against sources that don't yet exist, or those we may have omitted is a requisite byproduct of this architectural decision.
```

> The goal of first-class multi-sync support generally is to broaden Flagd's potential to suit the needs of many different types of engineers, operating in many different contexts. By decoupling flag persistence from the runtime, Flagd can focus on evaluation and sync, while enabling its user-base to choose a persistence layer that best suits their individual requirements. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The goal of first-class multi-sync support generally is to broaden flagd's potential to suit the needs of many different types of users or architecture. By decoupling flag persistence from the runtime, flagd can focus on evaluation and sync, while enabling its user-base to choose a persistence layer that best suits their individual requirements. 
```

> ## Background

Reviewer: Trying to understand more of the background - is this a backfill ADR? 
It also confuses me a bit as I don't see the connection between storage and multi sync sources - is the concern around the data consistency?

> Flagd daemon is a feature flag evaluation engine that forms a core part of the OpenFeature ecosystem. Unlike OpenFeature SDK components, which are, by design, agnostic to the specifics of flag structure, evaluation, and persistence, Flagd must take an opinionated stance about how feature-flags look, feel, and act. What schema best describes a flag? How should they be evaluated? And in what sort of persistence layer should they be stored?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The flagd daemon is a feature flag evaluation engine that forms a core part of the OpenFeature ecosystem as a production-grade reference implementation. Unlike OpenFeature SDK components, which are, by design, agnostic to the specifics of flag structure, evaluation, and persistence, flagd must take an opinionated stance about how feature-flags look, feel, and act. What schema best describes a flag? How should they be evaluated? And in what sort of persistence layer should they be stored?
```

## Requirements

* Support the storage technology that's most likely to meet the needs of current Flagd user-base (Don't be weird. Don't be surprising.)
* Make it "easy" to extend the flagd runtime to support "new" storage systems
* Horizontally scalable persistence layer
* Minimize end-user exposure to persistence "quirks" (replication schemes, leader election, back-end scaling, consistency minutia, etc.. )
* Reliable, Fast, Transparent
* Full CRUD, read-optimized.

## Considered Options

* Be super-opinionated and prescribe a built-in raftesque key-value setup, analogous to the designs of k8s and kafka, which prescribe etcd and zookeeper respectively.
* Roll a single "standard interface" for flag sync (published grpc spec or similar) (??) 
* Decouple storage from flagd entirely, by exposing a Golang interface type that "providers" can implement to provide support for any data store.

## Proposal
<!--
Unsure whether we want a diagram in this section or not. Happy to add one if we want one.

> -->

Reviewer 2: Not needed IMO, but wouldn't hurt :shrug:

> The solution to the conundrum posited in the background section of this document is to decouple flag storage entirely from the rest of the runtime, including instead support for myriad commonly used data synchronization interfaces. This allows Flagd to be agnostic to flag storage, while enabling users to use whichever storage back-end best suits their environment.

Reviewer: What the interface of the storage you have in mind when coming up with this proposal? The existing implementation or there's another new proposal?

Author: This is a backfill ADR for the existing ISync interface.

```
type ISync interface {
	// Init is used by the sync provider to initialize its data structures and external dependencies.
	Init(ctx context.Context) error

	// Sync is the contract between Runtime and sync implementation.
	// Note that, it is expected to return the first data sync as soon as possible to fill the store.
	Sync(ctx context.Context, dataSync chan<- DataSync) error

	// ReSync is used to fetch the full flag configuration from the sync
	// This method should trigger an ALL sync operation then exit
	ReSync(ctx context.Context, dataSync chan<- DataSync) error

	// IsReady shall return true if the provider is ready to communicate with the Runtime
	IsReady() bool
}
```
Synchronization events "fan-in" from all configured sync providers to flagd's in-memory state-store via a channel carrying [`sync.DataSync`](https://github.com/open-feature/flagd/blob/main/core/pkg/store/flags.go#L19) events. These events detail the source and type of the change, along with the flag data in question and are merged into the currently held state by the [store](https://github.com/open-feature/flagd/blob/main/core/pkg/store/flags.go#L19).

> ### API changes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Consequences
```

I think this is actually all about conseqences.

<!--
This section should describe any API changes that are part of the proposal.
This includes any new endpoints, changes to existing endpoints, or modifications to the data model.
It should provide enough detail for developers to understand how the API will evolve and what impact it will have on existing clients.
-->

> Because synchronization providers may vary wildly with respect to their implementation details, supporting multiple synch providers means supporting custom configuration parameters for each provider. As a consequence, Flagd's configuration is itself made more complex, and its bootstrap process, whose goal is to create a [`runtime.Runtime`](https://github.com/open-feature/flagd/blob/main/flagd/pkg/runtime/runtime.go#L21) object from user-provided configuration, spends the preponderance of its time and effort interpreting, configuring, and initializing sync providers. There is, in fact, a custom bootstrap type, called the `syncbuilder` whose job is to bootstrap synch providers and arrange them into a map, for the runtime to use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because synchronization providers may vary wildly with respect to their implementation details, supporting multiple sync providers means supporting custom configuration parameters for each provider. As a consequence, Flagd's configuration is itself made more complex, and its bootstrap process, whose goal is to create a [`runtime.Runtime`](https://github.com/open-feature/flagd/blob/main/flagd/pkg/runtime/runtime.go#L21) object from user-provided configuration, spends the preponderance of its time and effort interpreting, configuring, and initializing sync providers. There is, in fact, a custom bootstrap type, called the `syncbuilder` whose job is to bootstrap sync providers and arrange them into a map, for the runtime to use.
```
